Ashtabula Harbor Historical District

How Historic District Zoning Affects You
The Harbor Historical District
The Ashtabula Harbor Historical District has zoning to protect historic buildings and preserve the character of the old
Harbor neighborhood. First established by the city in 1978 as part of the Harbor Restoration Project, the District
boundaries are codified by ordinance 2010-04, section 1137.02
Historic District Zoning helps to protect a neighborhood’s character. Neighborhoods protected by historic district
zoning usually enjoy stability and long term improvement to property values. Historic District Zoning and the Architectural
and Restoration Review Board are useful tools in maintaining property values and encouraging development in the
Harbor.
Protecting the quality and character of the Harbor Historical District requires the help and cooperation of everyone,
including property owners, business owners, and public servants. It is an important part of the Harbor Historical District’s
continued revitalization.
The Review Board
The Architectural and Restoration Review Board has the responsibility to review all signs and exterior changes including
alterations, restoration, rehabilitation, and construction to buildings within the Historic District.
The Review Board works with both residential and commercial property owners to guide decisions about exterior
alterations to buildings which require a zoning permit. Signs and commercial/public landscapes are reviewed as well.
Some alterations to buildings can forever erode value and destroy qualities that make a neighborhood appealing. An
awareness of the qualities that make an old building interesting can help a rehabilitation project add more value.
Often the historic look and quality of a building can be maintained using modern materials and cost effective design. New
construction and additions can be planned to have continuity and compatibility with existing buildings. The Review Board
can be a resource for property owners.
It is the Review Board’s mission to maintain the architectural integrity of the Harbor Historical District and preserve its
historical features.
The Review Process
An owner or contractor must submit an Application for Review before receiving a zoning permit for work to be done in the
Historical District.
Applications for Review and Design Guidelines are available on line or at the Municipal Building from the Office of
Community Development. This office can also put the applicant in contact with a member of the Review Board if there are
questions about preparing for review. Often a preliminary conference can facilitate the process.

The Architectural and Restoration Review Board guidelines are based on the nationally accepted Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for Historical Rehabilitation. The Board has officially endorsed the Benjamin Moore Historical Colors
paint chart or its equivalent.
The Architectural and Restoration Review Board holds monthly meetings to review applications for signs and exterior
work. After review and agreement is reached, the Review Board issues a signed Certificate of Appropriateness. The
city zoning official may then issue a permit to the applicant. Decisions of the Review Board are binding. They may be
appealed to the Ashtabula City Planning Commission according to the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Ashtabula.
Special Status of Property Listed on the National Register of Historic Places within the Harbor Historical District is
properties that have been placed on the National Historic Register because of their significance. These include the
Hubbard House, Mother of Sorrows Catholic Church, The Bascule Lift Bridge, and the group of buildings at the eastern
end of Bridge Street known as the Ashtabula Harbor National Register Area. The National Register Area includes
structures beginning with the 1000 block of Bridge Street and continuing up to and including 1205 Bridge Street.
Secretary of the Interior Standards are most strictly upheld with National Register Properties.
It is important to note that the National Register properties on Bridge Street are listed as a group and their
continued significance depends on maintaining the integrity of individual properties as part of a whole.
Any work done to the exterior of a National Register Property must be reviewed by the Board even if it does not
require a zoning permit.
Resources:

Ohio Historic Society Preservation Office
www.ohiohistory.org/ohio-historic-preservation-office

Historic Preservation Briefs National Park Service, how to information for projects
www.nps.gov/tps/how-to-preserve.htm

Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties
http://www.nps.gov/tps/standards/four-treatments/treatment-guidelines.pdf

The Harbor Historical District

